yeah we've been
the theme of changing conversations and
I
it's a really important point to be at
from the discourses that are going on
within architecture as well as
throughout society I think that it is
time to change the way that that we look
at things and as an architect and that
I've been involved with architectural
projects with urban planning projects
and more recently uh projects that
engage much more with the landscape now
I can see so many opportunities and so
many ways in which design can contribute
and and has the capacity to affect
social change and that's what I'm gonna
talk to you today about starting off I
think it might be useful to talk a
little bit about architecture because I
think for many people
architecture is slight kind of slightly
mystical activity not many people know
what architects do a lot of the time I'm
not sure that the architects know what
they're doing but we try and it's
important to try and kind of embrace
that and try and understand what that
means
and when I talk about architecture today
I'm not talking about the profession I'm
not talking about an activity that's
pursued by a sort of select group of
people with some specialized knowledge
I'm talking about architecture in the
bigger sense in architecture in terms of
the room that we're in architecture is a
pervasive activity architecture is the
activity that is the creation of shelter
the creation of space the design and the
creation of spaces between buildings the
landscape it's it's man's interaction
with the landscape our construction of
the built environment that's what I
that's what I mean by by architecture
it's not it's not a specialized thing
and and over the last I suppose 20-30
years with the predominance of the
internet and the the wonderful and
exciting advancements that have taken
place in technology one of the things
that has happened is that our perception
of the world has become commodified it's
become reduced in many ways to a
perception that is two-dimensional we
spend a lot of our time a lot of our
lives looking at the world through
screens whether it's our laptops or
television screens or monitors at
airports or
in the workplace what even our
telephones are now screens and it has
this effect of reducing our perception
of the what it expanded in many ways but
it can reduce and it can turn into icons
our idea our notion of certain concepts
or ideas that that are in fact maybe a
lot more pervasive than the
two-dimensional image can convey and I
think that's true about architecture I
think but I think we're a custom we've
grown accustomed to thinking about
architecture in a really primarily
two-dimensional way in a flat way that
the building is about what it looks like
how it appears it's it's visual and
commodity but it's much more than that
it's much more than an aesthetic or just
a sensory experience that's very
important it's much more than it-it's a
complex operation and a big part of
architecture and the big part of design
involves understanding the context in
which that design exists or which is
going to exist it's having the
imagination to try and predict or
project where the building or where the
urban space or whether the landscape is
going to be located how it's going to be
used what are the operations what are
the activities that are going to take
place in that space and you might call
those the programmatic aspects of
architecture the programmatic aspects of
design and I think that in recent times
we've tent we've tend to privilege or
put at a higher level that visual
sensory perception or desire about
architecture ahead and in advance of
those programmatic needs we've tended to
kind of create monuments create icons
and that create a sensational create
effect without really thinking through
the value of the operation that those
places or those spaces can can can
affect and it's in that zone or in that
area that I think we need to start
looking or trying to understand how
architecture or how design can really
impact on society and how it can address
some of the problems that we're facing
big buzzword and in design and what I do
and I think what everybody does is the
idea of sustainability and
sustainability as an idea it's a notion
or a concept is triangulated by three
very important concepts or ideas the
environment the economy and society or
the global economy seems to be in
currently in a kind of Mel
found situation you know there's a lot
of work needs to be done there the
environment it's it's challenge the
environment that we live in is
challenged we've got global warming
we've got rising tides we've got all
sorts of disasters taking place all
sorts of things happening that that
threaten the equilibrium of the world
and the environment that we live in and
society itself is also challenged and
threatened by some of the issues that
we're faced with and I think we've heard
about some of those issues but this used
today and the needs to change the
paradigm in which we perceive those
things it's really very crucial that we
do that and so how does design impact of
that how can how can i as a designer or
anybody is a designer or anybody need
any architect or how can society how do
that what what we can design impact on
that in what we can affect that I'm
going to talk today about ways in which
I think that design can impact on
society very specifically on society and
how that idea of design can can
infiltrate the idea of society and work
with society in the operations of
society in this programmatic way to
affect social change this is an image of
Frederick Street in the early part of
the last century and I think it's kind
of a good a good image in lots of ways
it seems like that little triangulation
of the environment the economy and
society seems to be in a kind of balance
so it seems that in cities we can see
that balance that cities are kind of
symbols or ciphers or ways in which we
can we can understand the confluence of
those forces and there have been you
know through time there have been times
when cities have done that very
successfully there are lots of examples
of very good cities which which have
found themselves at a specific moment in
time at a point of balance or
equilibrium and if we look at Port of
Spain as a city and we and we consider
the idea that once upon a time Port of
Spain was just a little cluster a little
fishing village at the mouth of the st.
Anne's River and yet it's grown to be
such a big complex conglomeration a big
big conurbation of lots and lots of
complex ideas
and the Italian architect Aldo Rossi is
a twentieth-century architect who died
at the end of the last century made a
very very profound statement he said
architecture is the making of the city
over time I think that's a great great
statement because it talks on one level
about the individual production and
manufacture of an object architecture
and it talks about architecture as being
a form of cultural production as
something that that speaks to an issue
or speaks to ideas that are bigger than
the sum of the parts of the building and
it relates it to the city and it and it
also suggested it's a constant dynamic
changing process and I think that's a
very important thing to understand
that's also part of the program notes
it's nothing to do with visual it's to
do with the program it's how does this
evolve what are the dynamics what are
the components what are the elements
contribute to the unraveling and the
creation of the city and it also speaks
to the fact that the city is something
that can be imagined in the same way as
we can conceive and imagine of a space
or a building that we can conceive and
imagine of a city it speaks to the idea
of the individual and the collective
and it's that link the individual to the
collective the idea of this Civitas the
idea of the society that I think is a
really important axiom for understanding
how design can can infiltrate and how
design can affect change these are some
images of how Porter Spain evolved over
a very short relatively short period of
200 years from a colonial plan that was
developed following some ordinances that
sent out by the king of Spain called the
laws of the Indies many cities in the
Caribbean in Latin America were were
predicated and formulated on this it was
it was a gesture it was a single design
that addressed the needs and the
requirements of of those establishing
cities and new colonies and it expanded
an overtime as trade began to develop in
Trinidad the city expanded and it grew
and it started appropriating more and
more of the surrounding landscape until
it grew to pretty much what we have
today or what we understand to be the
city of Port of Spain but as we all know
that process grew also on a kind of
macro scale as well and we have the
evolution and the development of this
big conurbation that really stretches
from Port of Spain to the west and then
over 2mr Arouca in the east and seems to
be continuing so we've developed into
this concept or idea that far exceeds
the original laws of the Indies plan and
Stern has turned into a complex
arrangement and matrix of
infrastructures and complex issues and
its use it in many ways have led to a
lot of problems they've led to a lot of
infrastructural problems and we share
this with many many cities in the world
cities all over the world are expanding
they're increasing they're undergoing
the same type of development that we've
undergone to the point where the
original port is vein and the downtown
port explained that used to comprise the
city used to constitute the city has now
turned into this sort of megalopolis
this sprawl and it's difficult to
comprehend and when we think of the
problems we think of the infrastructural
problems the water the power the traffic
congestion the crime the segregation the
polarization that exists the situation
that has led to what's happened in this
country recently with the state of
emergency sometimes it seems completely
insurmountable
it seems like we've got to a point where
we can't really control it it's gone out
of control in the way that we could
control that original plan we can't
really control this anymore it's almost
as if we have victims of the city rather
than people that have willingly or
willfully designed the city or
formulated the city another phenomenon
that has happened
commensurate with these these issues of
size and scale and infrastructure is the
predominating of what I would call
topologies different types of
development and we're all familiar with
the high-rise development the system
some buildings in Hong Kong know the you
know magnificent tall structures you
know that cost a fortune to build but
they predominates almost as if you can't
have a city unless you've got a
high-rise building in it they're they're
symbolic they seem emblematic with
modernity and development and then
shopping malls as another predominant
type another
prevalent type that all cities want to
have the idea that you know you could
concentrate all these shops and all this
retail activity in one place and and
create an environment for people to come
and do specific retail functions and
purchase things and be in a specific
place at a specific time and then the
highway the idea of cutting through
landscapes to create how is to increase
the speed from which we can do with
which we can get from one point to
another and then we also have suburban
development these are all type ologies
that are emblematic of the type of
development that has taken place in
modern cities in Port of Spain and
cities all over the world now there's
nothing wrong with shopping malls
there's nothing wrong with highways and
there's nothing wrong with high-rise
buildings or suburban development what
is kind of wrong is that what we seem to
be doing is privileged encodings or
ideas about building above other really
very important ways of how we can
conceive or how we imagine space what
about schools you know what about parks
what about making streets that are
really comfortable to walk on and the
people are not confronting traffic noise
and congestion all the time no where is
where is that in the equation it seems
it seems that with our focus on these
types of structures and these type
ologies which are motivated and driven
primarily because they generate profit
they're part of an economic consumer
system they generate profit that's why
they're favored that's why that they are
privileged above other types of
development but schools parks elements
of cities is to be really significant
and really important they're being
diminished and marginalized as a
consequence of the focus on this type of
development they're undermining the
integrity of the city they're
undermining the capacity of the city to
accommodate social interaction to
accommodate everybody because the other
thing that they do is they they they
also they're also exclusive to work in a
high-end office you need to be qualified
you need to be educated or you need to
have access so you need to have the
resources to get the qualifications or
the training that allow you to get the
job in there and if you don't have those
and you work outside somewhere we're not
really concerned about what those places
are like you just go and work somewhere
else similarly those people that used to
live in the cities or used to live and
contribute to the life
cities are being pushed out because
buildings like high-rise buildings push
them out push like that there's a
there's a premium on land price that
pushes people out of cities people can't
go to shopping wards unless they've got
cars because those those malls are
generally located on the peripheries of
cities and people can't go and buy
things in shopping malls because
generally they don't have enough
disposable income they're not going to
spend money there so those types of
buildings once they work for sectors of
society don't work for everybody they're
not equitable and yet an undue amount of
attention is paid by government by
society on ensuring that those types of
buildings proliferate because they're
seen as positive they're seen as as
positive aspects of development at the
expense of types of building and types
of program that could be beneficial to
everybody types the program that hadn't
currently encourage interaction that
encouraged education and encouraged
people to be with each other and
encourage a sense of community these
types of development dissipate society
they disaggregate society they polarize
society they create groups isolated
groups of activity to which access
depends upon how much money you've got
in your pocket
it's a polarizing and negative force we
see it in this city missing more and
more in other cities and what it ends up
happens up happening is that we end up
with this sort of stack that's like a
time bomb you know at some point the
system must collapse it's really not
sustainable it's like the economic
system in the world today it's really
not a sustainable system and we have to
find ways of addressing it but design
can't provide the solution but what it
can address is it can address some of
the conditions that people live with it
can address some of the circumstances in
which people find themselves some of the
areas of cities to which people have
been kind of shunted or pushed aside
because they can no longer afford to
live in the center and because it can't
participate actively or fully in this
sort of consumer eyes capitalized system
and we need to we need to try and
conceive of how we can transform these
types of spaces how we can integrate the
activities have happened in these types
of spaces within a bigger picture how we
can identify small moves or small
gestures whether through design or
through economic initiative or whether
through social initiative that
effect changes allowed transformation of
spaces that encourage and facilitate
greater participation and there are lots
of ways of doing that and whilst it
might seem complex when we look at
cities when we look at the aggregate
parts of cities it may seem
insurmountable
but if we try and isolate individual
acts individual ways of looking at
things and formulate a program formulate
a manner or a way of understanding how
we can do that then we can get nearer to
achieving or affecting some kind of
social change and there are examples in
the world of where that's been done
Barcelona is a really good example of a
city where people sat down and
collectively and actively tried to
conceive of ways in which they could
affect change and they did it very
successfully and nearer to home in
Bogota enrique pealosa the mayor of
Bogota when he took office he decided
I'm not going to spend billions of
dollars on creating more highways I'm
going to appropriate the funds I have
and I'm going to create places I'm going
to create parks that everybody can use
I'm going to create public spaces that
people can come and use and as he
created more and more people came into
those faces and those spaces were very
effective in encouraging participation
encouraging senses of community amongst
people getting people to come together
getting people to forget what little
trifling contests they had between each
other and to start doing things together
to start moving around the city together
and try to start acting together so
there are ways of doing it there are
models and it comes back to this idea of
program what's our program well I think
we want to create equitable Society and
then we want to create societies where
there's active and equitable
participation for everybody and where we
can break down some of those inhibitions
we can break down those barriers we can
remove economic stigma we can remove
stigma around race around where you live
around all those factors and try and
bring people together in constructed and
effective ways and in Trinidad there are
a number of example there are
opportunities to do this all over the
place this is city gate and city gate
you know it's the entrance to the city
for tens of thousands of people people
come in and out of it every day and yet
what they're confronted with is a pretty
bleak horrid grey unwelcoming sometimes
you know unsafe because of all the
traffic that's zooming around a mouth
space that space from city gate that
moves up to Independence Square could be
a really wonderful experience you know
with landscaping with a with proper
accommodation of the sort of facilities
and amenities that people would need and
would enjoy it could become a really
very very important Civic space this is
the prado in Havana it's just a notional
idea of how that space could be treated
so that movement in and out of the city
every day becomes a really important and
uplifting transition from the maxi taxi
to the place where you work in San
Fernando we've got the waterfront which
is a really very beautiful part of this
landscape in this country but is in
complete neglect there's some really
beautiful fine examples of 19th century
architecture that that form in and of
themselves some really fine spaces we
need to we need to look at those spaces
we need to appropriate them we need to
determine uses for those spaces that
would encourage all types of activity
spaces for performance spaces for
children to play in and learn that it's
cool and it's okay and it's fun to be
around other people basically for people
to do things to do all the kinds of
activities that people like to do that
they like and they enjoy to do doing
collectively and the benefits aside in
and encourage people to interact
regardless of their social or economic
circumstance or places for people to
reflect parks places for people to sit
and relax and there are lots of ways we
can do that there are lots of ways in
which we can address and look at how we
break down those barriers we can do it
with architectural language we can look
at the ways that spaces are formulated
to break down divisions and barriers
between inside and outside between green
and hard surfaces and try and generate
spaces that really encourage interaction
encourage people to do things together
and encourage a sense of community we
need to mandate government we need to we
need to provide examples to developers
to people to generate that the benefit
of these may not be measured in a
financial return on investment but the
social benefit to us all is really
immeasurable in the long run and if we
do that I think we can we can
demonstrate where we were move
demonstrated in the past that designers
had the capacity to do that but I think
if we can do that that we can
demonstrate to people that society is an
inclusive
unity and that if everybody is included
and if everybody feels part of the
society then we have a much better
chance of ensuring a sustainable future
thank you
[Applause]